PAKISTAN - SECULAR OR ISLAMIC STATE?

The often debated nature of the state of Pakistan happens unfortunately mostly by those who neither understand what secularism is nor what an Islamic state constitutes.
To make matters worse, none of the parties passionately involved are have even attempted to study the constitution that they so vigourously are always trying to criticise.
Having said this, let's look at some aspects of the constituion without going into detail which give us some understanding of the hybrid nature of the document.

PREAMBLE

--

This makes it clear that within the territorial extent of the state of Pakistan, no law can be put in place which supercedes or directly and unquivocally goes against the
principles of the Quran and Hadith. But at the same time, the laws pertaining to the worldy lives of the common men are indeed either inspired from or borrowed directly from
the western secularist states, especially the British Empire from which the Pakistani state inherits and models its own constitution over. In this context, secular laws are 
indeed part of the Pakistani canon. In principle, they are as follows:

--

Having studied these small aspects make it clearer to us that above the Constitution itself, a Super-Constitution exists in the Pakistani realm (both social and legal) which
is either directly or attempts to fall within the bounds of the Divine Law of Islam, however the Hanafi Fiqh defines it to be. Thus, the principles of Secularism are indeed 
in place in the Pakistani law but they are only functional so long as they fall within the Shariah. This leads us to the conclusion that by definition and principle, Pakistan
is indeed an Islamic State, but having been built upon a secular precusor British state, the void left behind is fulfilled by Tribal and Western Secular laws. In essence, this 
makes Pakistan a hybrid state or an Islamized Secular state. That is, secular principles are in practice but if and only if they are already permitted by the Shariah.

Thus, to answer the question, Pakistan is an Islamic state with secular tendencies. OR, a secular state following Islamic ideals. Regardless of the inspiration, the Divine Law
always reigns supreme in the realm.

References: